Expand "Diagnose unassigned shards" page (#4705)
elastic/docs-content: troubleshoot/elasticsearch/diagnose-unassigned-shards.md

Shards can become unassigned for many reasons, such as node failures, cluster or indices configuration, insufficient resources, or allocation rules that prevent {{es}} from placing the shard on any available node.

## Check cluster health and scope impact

> Unassigned shards directly affects the cluster health status. Start by confirming whether unassigned shards are affecting availability and which indices are impacted:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unassigned shards directly affect the health of your cluster. Use the [cluster health API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-cluster-health) to check for any unassigned shards, and if so which indices are impacted:
```
This suggested rephrasing removes "are affecting availability" which I found a bit unclear, and I think it's helpful to link to the API cluster health API docs.

* **What you might see:** `/_cluster/allocation/explain` includes [disk-related allocation decisions](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/cluster-level-shard-allocation-routing-settings#cluster-routing-allocation-disk-watermark-flood_stage) (for example, deciders indicating insufficient free disk).
* **What to do:** Free disk space, add capacity, or adjust disk watermark settings as appropriate, then allow allocation to retry.

### Allocation is disabled

Shard allocation can be intentionally [disabled](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/configuration-reference/cluster-level-shard-allocation-routing-settings#cluster-shard-allocation-settings) during maintenance or rolling restarts. When allocation is disabled, shards may remain unassigned even if the cluster has enough capacity to allocate them.

* **What you might see:** `/_cluster/allocation/explain` indicates allocation is not permitted (for example, due to cluster routing allocation settings).

> * **What to do:** Check the cluster routing allocation settings (such as `cluster.routing.allocation.enable`) and re-enable allocation when appropriate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **What to do:** Check the cluster routing allocation settings, such as `cluster.routing.allocation.enable`, and re-enable allocation when appropriate.
```

### Not enough eligible nodes for replicas or data tiers

> Shards can remain unassigned when there are not enough eligible nodes to satisfy the index’s replica count or its allocation constraints (for example, data tiers or allocation filters). This commonly occurs when the replica count is greater than the number of eligible nodes, or when tier/filter rules exclude all available nodes. Reference [Data tier allocation settings](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/index-settings/data-tier-allocation)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shards can remain unassigned when there are not enough eligible nodes to satisfy the index’s replica count or its allocation constraints (for example, data tiers or allocation filters). This commonly occurs when the replica count is greater than the number of eligible nodes, or when tier/filter rules exclude all available nodes. Refer to [Data tier allocation settings](https://www.elastic.co/docs/reference/elasticsearch/index-settings/data-tier-allocation) to learn more.
```
